[docs] Accessibility checklist (#754)
moodle/devdocs: general/development/process/peer-review/accessibility-checklist.md

---
title: Accessibility checklist
tags:
  - Processes
  - Integration
  - Accessibility
sidebar_position: 4
---

<!-- cspell:ignore ACTIVITYNAME, Deque -->

This document proposes a checklist for accessibility reviews. Not all aspects of accessibility can be checked automatically, so this checklist is intended to guide reviewers when doing an accessibility check to a patch.

> ## Identify the Nature of Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip Identify the Nature of Changes

- **Are the changes on the backend only (webservices, database updates, events, hooks...)?**<br/>
If yes, no accessibility review is needed.

- **Are there changes to the HTML, CSS, or JavaScript?**<br/>
If yes, an accessibility review is necessary.

- **Do the changes only involve standard HTML elements without altering default browser behaviour?**<br/>
If yes, a quick accessibility check is recommended, but a complete review may not be necessary.

:::
```

Reviewer: I think this section would look better displayed as an admonition.

Reviewer 2: But without the br tags

I wonder if this is a good fit for a definitinon list so that there is semantic markup instead of just bold

Author: I tried the list in pure HTMl using <dl>, but the result was not super clear without adding <strong> to the <dt> element. The final code in HTML is less friendly than a nested list alternative.
I changed it by markdown nested lists and the result is similar to what Sara was trying to do.

> **Are the changes on the backend only (webservices, database updates, events, hooks...)?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Are the changes on the backend only (webservices, database updates, events, hooks...)?**<br/>
```

Reviewer: To make it more readable, I think it would be better to display these questions in bullet lists (I've only changed the first one, but the other 2 questions should be changed too).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## General Checks

Those are some quick checks you can do to ensure that the changes are accessible.

### Use of tabindex

Tabindex > 0 is wrong. Using any tabindex value other than 0 (for focusable elements) or -1 (for non-focusable elements) is an anti-pattern. It can cause unexpected behaviour for keyboard users.

### Zoom test

Test the page in 200% and 400% zoom. If the page is not usable or elements are overlapped, the changes must be fixed before continuing.

### Icons and images

If the patch uses icons or images, check if they has a proper `alt` text.

Most icons should have an empty alt text for icons, particularly in interactive containers such as buttons or links. This will assist mouse users, particularly when hovering over the icon button/link, which will display a tooltip without hovering over the icon itself.

Decorative images should have an empty alt text (alt=""). In contrast, icons should have a descriptive alt text unless the alt text will be redundant with the surrounding elements.

### Buttons

Buttons with no comprehensive text should have an `aria-label` or `aria-labelledby` attribute.

> However, buttons with only icons should:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, for the buttons with only icons:
```

- The icon itself should have an empty `alt` attribute so assistive technologies will ignore it.
- Extra text must added to the button using a `span` with the `sr-only` class. This text will be only visible for assistive technologies.

> Here is an example of a `button` with a descriptive `sr-only` text:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html title="An example of a `button` with a descriptive `sr-only` text"
```

<button type="button" class="btn btn-primary">
  <img src="./pix/add_user.png" alt="">
  <span class="sr-only">Add a new user</span>
</button>
```

> And this another one using fontawesome icons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html title="Another example using fontawesome icons"
```

<button type="button" class="btn btn-primary">
  <i class="icon fa-user-plus fa-fw " aria-hidden="true"></i>
  <span class="sr-only">Add a new user</span>
</button>
```

### Visible focus

All focusable elements should have a visible focus indicator that should be **different** from the default browser focus indicator. The focus indicator should be visible in all states (normal, hover, focus, active, disabled).

> By default, Moodle override the focus indicator of most HTML elements to ensure accessibility. However, in some cases it is necessary to add extra CSS rules to ensure the focus indicator is visible and has enough contrast. For those cases, Moodle provides some CSS helpers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Moodle overrides the focus indicator of most HTML elements to ensure accessibility. However, in some cases, it is necessary to add extra CSS rules to ensure the focus indicator is visible and has enough contrast. For those cases, Moodle provides some CSS helpers:
```

- Adding `aalink` to a link (or any other element acting as a link) will ensure the focus indicator is visible.
- The CSS class `focus-visible` should be used to ensure the focus indicator is only visible when the element is focused using the keyboard.
- In action menus or action menu sub panels, you can use `dropdown-item-outline` to ensure the focus indicator is visible on all the item and not only in the link element within.

### Page headers and title

> Each new page should have a specific and descriptive page title. For example, use "Settings in forum ACTIVITYNAME" instead of just "Activity settings".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each new page should have a specific and descriptive page title.

:::info Example

Use "Settings in forum ACTIVITYNAME" instead of just "Activity settings".

:::
```

In some cases, parts of the link text can be hidden using CSS so it is only readable by assistive technologies. To do so you can use several methods:

- Add a span with `sr-only` class to the element. The `sr-only` class is only visible for assistive technologies.
- If parts of the link meaning is represented by an icon, add an `alt` text to the icon so it will be read with the rest of the link text.

### Is CSS ordering elements different than DOM?

If yes, it can cause unexpected behaviour for keyboard users. The patch should provide an ad-hoc keyboard navigation using an AMD module.

### When the new elements are focused, do the down and tab keys still work in the default way?

If not means the code has a pointer cancellation. In this case the patch should implement a proper custom component pattern. See [Review Custom Components](#review-custom-components) for more information.

### Does Any of the elements have a CSS animation?

If yes, it is recommended the patch should provide a way to stop the animation.

> For Moodle version 4.3 and above, any CSS animation could be marked as optional by importing the `optional-animation` SCSS mixin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From Moodle 4.3 onwards, any CSS animation could be marked as optional by importing the `optional-animation` SCSS mixin.
```

### Does the patch adds tabindex="0" to any element?

If yes, there are a few things you need to check:

> - If the element is a link, a button or a form control, then the tabindex should be removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the element is a link, a button or a form control, then the `tabindex` should be removed.
```

- The focus is managed correctly. For example, if the focus is moved to a new element, the focus should be moved back to the original element when the new content is removed.

You can read more about dynamic content in the [ARIA live regions reference documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions).

## Forms checks

Unless custom forms fields are used, all moodleforms are considered accessible.

When a patch introduce adhoc forms, it is important they follow the [forms guidelines](../../policies/designing-usable-forms.md).

### Checks for custom forms (not using moodleforms)

- All form fields should have an `id` attribute and a `label` elements with the same value in the `for` attribute. The label can be visible or hidden using CSS, but it should be present in the HTML.
- The form should be usable with the keyboard only. This means that all form fields should be focusable and the form should be submittable using the keyboard only.
- If the form have data validation:

>   - the error messages should be visible and announced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The error messages should be visible and announced.
```
